GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: The Israeli military
deploys hundreds of troops
and seals off parts of East
Jerusalem, as clashes with
Palestinians continue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday: Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders spar on
gun control, big banks and more.
We break down last night's
Democratic debate.
GWEN IFILL: Then: A park
director puts his life on the
line to protect one of Congo's
greatest resources,
Virunga National Park.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE, Director,
Virunga National Park: There's
no park probably in the world
that has so many species of
mammals, reptiles, and birds as
Virunga. That's what makes it
so special.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Justice
Stephen Breyer explains why the
Supreme Court sometimes must
consider laws in other countries
when making decisions about our
own.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The situation in
Syria had U.S. and Russian
military officials talking
today, at least by long
distance. They discussed ways to
avoid confrontations between
warplanes
crisscrossing Syrian skies.
Meanwhile, the war on the ground
raged on. Rebels in Northern
Syria fought using American-made
anti-tank weapons today, trying
to slow a government offensive
in Hama province. The
Assad regime is taking advantage
of Russian airstrikes currently
hitting targets in Hama
and Aleppo.
That has raised concerns about
possible midair incidents
between U.S. and Russian pilots,
and Moscow now acknowledges that
one of its planes came within a
few miles of a U.S. jet
on Saturday.
MAJ. GEN. IGOR KONASHENKOV,
Russian Ministry of Defense
(through translator): While
moving
to the area, the plane's threat
alert system fixed on the
activity of an unknown flying
object. The jet turned and
approached it, not to scare
someone, but to identify the
object and whom it belongs to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a bid to set
rules of the air, Pentagon
officials held a third round
of videoconference talks with
the Russian military today, but
White House spokesman
Josh Earnest confirmed there are
no plans for wider-ranging talks
on Syria.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: We have said that
we're not interested in
doing that as long as Russia is
not willing to make a
constructive contribution to our
counter-ISIL effort. Russia has
their own agenda, and it's an
agenda right now that
they're pursuing on their own.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
Iranian lawmakers visited
Syria's capital, Damascus, amid
reports
that hundreds of Iranian ground
troops have joined the fight to
shore up the Assad regime.
GWEN IFILL: In Iraq, government
forces say they have launched a
new offensive to recapture
Baiji from the Islamic State
militants. The key northern city
sits about 90 miles south
of Mosul, and is home to the
country's largest oil refinery.
Caravans of vehicles carrying
Iraqi army and Shiite militia
fighters could be seen on the
move there in recent days.
The city has changed hands
several times in the last year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Iranian
nuclear deal cleared what
appears to be a final hurdle in
Tehran
today. A majority of the
country's Guardian Council, made
up of both Muslim clerics and
lawyers, ruled the accord does
not violate religious law. This
comes a day after Iran's
legislature approved the deal,
and it means dismantling of
nuclear infrastructure can
begin.
GWEN IFILL: For the first time
in six years, Afghanistan may
produce less opium. A joint
U.N. and Afghan survey reports
the acreage planted in opium
poppies is down 19 percent.
Officials say that's due mainly
to bad weather, but also to a
change in how farmed areas are
measured. As a result, the
country's potential output of
opium could fall by nearly half
this year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pope Francis
apologized today for what he
called scandals that have
recently
occurred in the church. The
pontiff spoke during a general
audience for the public at
the Vatican. He didn't elaborate
or cite any examples.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through translator): The
word of Jesus is strong today.
He says it is inevitable that
there will be scandals. But woe
to the man who causes them.
Therefore, I ask for forgiveness
for the scandals that have
occurred recently either in Rome
or in the Vatican. I ask
you for forgiveness.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A spokesman
wouldn't specify which incidents
the pope had in mind. They
may have involved a monsignor
who was fired after he announced
he was gay or a priest
who said children are at
fault for pedophilia.
GWEN IFILL: Volkswagen now says
its 2016 diesel models contain
even more software that could
cheat on emissions tests. The
company says it told the
Environmental Protection Agency
last week. The information
didn't appear in V.W.'s initial
applications to meet U.S.
emissions
standards. For now, thousands of
2016 Volkswagens are quarantined
at U.S. ports.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, Toyota
announced that it hopes to
eliminate nearly all
gasoline-powered
vehicles from its lineup by
2050. Instead, it's shifting to
hybrids and fuel cell technology
that converts hydrogen into
energy and water. Toyota aims to
cut emissions from its cars
by 90 percent below 2010 levels.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
stocks gave ground after
Wal-Mart issued a warning about
future profits. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 157
points to close below 16925. The
Nasdaq fell 13 points, and
the S&P 500 slipped nine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour": simmering
tensions in the Middle East;
Supreme
Court Justice Stephen Breyer's
new book, "The Court and the
World": Gwen sits down with
Ta-Nehisi Coates to get his take
mass incarceration, and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: Violence and
counterviolence continued today
in Israel. Israeli police
reported that
an Arab attacker stabbed a
70-year-old woman near
Jerusalem's Central Bus Station,
while,
in Bethlehem, dozens of
Palestinian protesters clashed
with Israeli troops.
Over the past two weeks, 32
Palestinians and seven Israelis
have been killed. And each
side blames the other for
this latest outbreak.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Martin Seemungal is in
Jerusalem. I spoke with him a
short
while ago.
Martin, welcome.
So, tell us today what the mood
and the atmosphere is like in
Jerusalem.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Well, it's
a very tense situation.
We have had a few days of these
so-called lone wolf terror
attacks, knifings of Jews
on the streets here in Jerusalem
and some other parts of Israel.
And that's got people
extremely nervous, people
looking over their should, not
knowing when the potential next
attack could come.
There was one, as we talked
about in -- just outside the Old
City, an attack, an attempt
on -- attack on an Israeli
security guard. The perpetrator
was shot. And then, of course,
the attack at the bus station,
where a 70-year-old woman was
stabbed, and that perpetrator
was
shot. Those kinds of things
only add to the tension here.
Amid all that, Benjamin
Netanyahu and the Israeli
government making good on its
promise
to crack down in these areas, in
these Arab areas where the
attackers have come from.
So, we have seen an entire
neighborhood, an Arab
neighborhood called Jabel
Mukaber, cut
off. We have had checkpoints put
up. And we see people being
searched.
The rest of East Jerusalem not
as sealed off as we had thought
it would be. However, we
do see roadblocks that we hadn't
seen before. Obviously, the
Israelis trying to make a point
that they're going to punish
people in those areas where
those attackers came from.
Also, the Israeli government
talking about destroying the
homes of the terrorists, also
talking about stripping them of
their residency, and even
there's a discussion that the
bodies
of the attackers who have been
killed, obviously, are not going
to be given back to the
families,
the Israeli government saying,
when they do that, all that does
is give an opportunity
to support terror, and these
funerals become a celebration of
terror.
So, the Israelis say they
don't want to do that.
GWEN IFILL: So, what has been
the Palestinian reaction, not
only on the streets, but also
in the government?
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Well, the
Palestinians are saying these
actions by the Israelis in East
Jerusalem are unprecedented, and
they see it as collective
punishment.
Mahmoud Abbas made a statement
today on Palestinian television
where he said: We have the right
to peaceful protest. We're going
to continue to stand up to the
occupation.
He didn't mention anything about
the terror attacks in recent
days. That raised some eyebrows
here in Israel. He talked about
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which, as we
know, has been a source
of great concern among the
Palestinians. They feel that the
Israelis are trying to change
the status quo on the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, and they're accusing the
Israeli government of
trying to do that.
The Israeli government responded
very swiftly to that, saying --
this evening, saying that
Mahmoud Abbas is only adding to
the incitement and spreading
lies among the Palestinian
population
and only making things worse.
GWEN IFILL: You used the term
lone wolf to describe these
attacks and counterattacks
at the top here.
It seems like this is a little
different. There's a viral
aspect to these attacks and
the degree to which people
act and counter-react.
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL: Absolutely.
And, you know, that viral aspect
on social media, whenever
there's an attack, it spreads
on social media, and each side
has its own narrative as to
what's behind it. The
Palestinians
say that the Israelis are
treating some of the people who
were the attackers very badly.
We saw that video yesterday of
the young boy on the ground, the
Israelis saying that these
are terrorists, they're being
whipped up by the Palestinian
leadership.
And, as a result, this just
keeps going on and on. And, you
know, we have this attempt
by the Israeli government to try
to put a lid on this with these
checkpoints and deploying
more troops and whatnot. But one
of those attackers today, the
one outside the Old City,
for example, didn't come from
anywhere in the Jerusalem area.
He came from Hebron.
So, these attacks are very
unpredictable, and, as far as we
can tell, they're not organized.
So, that is very difficult for
the Israelis to try and put a
stop to it.
GWEN IFILL: Martin Seemungal
reporting for us tonight from
Jerusalem, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Democratic
candidates for president got
back on the campaign trail today
after an issues-packed
debate last night.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports on what we
learned from their first
five-way
face-to-face encounter.
ANDERSON COOPER, Moderator:
Please welcome the Democratic
candidates for president of
the United States.
LISA DESJARDINS: The five-person
Las Vegas stage quickly morphed
into a two-person heavyweight
match, as Democratic socialist
Bernie Sanders was asked if he
is also a capitalist.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate: Do I
consider myself part of the
casino capitalist
process, by which so few have so
much, and so many have so
little, by which Wall Street's
greed and recklessness wrecked
this economy? No, I don't.
LISA DESJARDINS: It was a
symbolic start to a policy
deep-debate, and Hillary Clinton
moved to critique, but
defend the system.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: It's our
job to rein in the excesses of
capitalism,
but we would be making a grave
mistake to turn our backs on
what built the greatest
middle class in the
history of the world.
ANDERSON COOPER:
Senator Sanders?
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton
pointed to her experience.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I'm a
progressive. But I'm a
progressive who likes to get
things
done. And I know...
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: ... how
to find common ground, and I
know how to stand my ground,
and I have proved that in every
position that I have had.
LISA DESJARDINS: She soon went
on offense, highlighting
Sanders' vote against a
prominent
gun control bill.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Senator
Sanders did vote five times
against the Brady Bill. Since
it was passed, more than two
million prohibited purchases
have been prevented.
LISA DESJARDINS: The Vermont
senator insisted he, too, wants
gun control, but he argued
the issue is complicated.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: As a
senator from a rural state, what
I can tell Secretary Clinton,
that all the shouting in the
world is not going to do what I
would hope all of us want,
and that is keep guns out of the
hands of people who shouldn't
have those guns and end
this horrible violence
that we are seeing.
LISA DESJARDINS: The two rivals
did unite for a marquee moment
on Clinton's use of a
private e-mail server
as secretary of state.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, I
have taken responsibility for
it. I did say it was a
mistake.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: I think the
secretary is right, and that is
that the American people
are sick and tired of hearing
about your damn e-mails.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON:
Thank you. Me too. Me too.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton and
Sanders dominated. Each spoke
for about 30 minutes, according
to "NewsHour"'s analysis, twice
as long as anyone else on stage.
Former Maryland Governor Martin
O'Malley tried for a share of
the spotlight, hitting Clinton
for not pushing to separate big
banks and investment firms.
MARTIN O'MALLEY (D),
Presidential Candidate: You are
not for putting a firewall
between
this speculative, risky
shadow banking behavior.
LISA DESJARDINS:
Sanders jumped in.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: When
you have the three...
ANDERSON COOPER: Senator...
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: ... largest
banks in America are much bigger
than they were when
we bailed them out for being too
big to fail, we have got to
break them up.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton
wouldn't go that far, but said
that banks need strong scrutiny.
On either side of the stage, two
other opponents struggled to be
heard.
JIM WEBB (D), Presidential
Candidate: I have been waiting
for 10 minutes. I will say this.
ANDERSON COOPER:
You're over your time.
LISA DESJARDINS: Former Virginia
Senator Jim Webb and former
Rhode Island Senator and
Governor
Lincoln Chafee spoke their
minds, but landed few punches.
Voters can next judge the
Democratic hopefuls side by side
one month from today in Des
Moines.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Supreme Court
of the United States is often
the final say on the major
domestic conflicts of the day,
from voting rights to gay
marriage and health care.
But when foreign law crosses
paths with our legal system, how
should the Supreme Court
proceed?
Justice Stephen Breyer, who has
served on the court for over two
decades, examines this
in his new book, "The Court and
the World: American Law and the
New Global Realities."
And Justice Breyer joins me now.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
STEPHEN BREYER, Associate
Justice, U.S. Supreme Court:
Thank you very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's great
to have you with us.
So, with so many complicated
issues before this Supreme
Court, why did you take the time
to focus on how it's affected by
what's going on in other
countries?
STEPHEN BREYER: Well, I have
noticed that, over the course of
the last 20 years, we have
more and more cases, maybe now
15 or 20 percent, where what
goes on beyond our shores is
directly
relevant to our making a sound
decision on the American legal
question before us.
They range from security
problems, Guantanamo, to human
rights problems, victims of
tortures,
to commercial problems,
copyright, antitrust, securities
law, domestic relations,
marriages
that are governed by treaty.
They're all over the place.
And I wanted to show people,
concretely, in the case of our
institution, what that general
word, interdependence, means.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, just to
bore down on this a little bit,
you start out looking at
some cases involving national
security and, in some regards,
striking a balance between
national security,
civil liberties.
Why should the U.S. be concerned
with what foreign countries are
doing when deciding
important questions like that?
STEPHEN BREYER: We didn't have
to be, our court, for a long
time. We didn't have to
be in that area, because for
dozens and dozens and dozens of
years, the court simply stayed
out of the effort to balance
security interests, which was
the president's job, against
human
rights or limitations
on civil rights.
That led to a case in World War
II where 70,000 Americans of
Japanese origin were put into
camps in the center of the
country, prison camps, for no
reason, no good reason, and
the court upheld it.
Since that time, most people who
study these matters think that
was a terrible decision,
and, therefore, the court gets
involved. So, in Guantanamo
case, in those four cases, we
held in favor of the prisoner
prisoners in Guantanamo. And
Sandra O'Connor wrote these
words: "The Constitution doesn't
write a blank check to the
president to run over civil
rights,
even when national
security is at issue."
Once you hear those words, blank
check, you have to ask, how do
we fill the check in?
And to know the answer to that
today involves knowing something
about security problems.
It involves knowing about
something involving terrorism,
which takes place abroad. It
involves
knowing how other countries
deal with those problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also bring up
the death penalty, and this
arose in a case the court
dealt with this year.
You wrote in your -- and you
included in the dissenting
opinion in that case -- you
cited
the fact that most countries on
Earth don't have the death
penalty anymore, either by
law or by practice. Again,
why is that relevant here?
STEPHEN BREYER: Well, it --
there's a debate on how relevant
it is.
The relevant constitutional
provision forbids punishments
that are cruel and unusual. The
founders didn't say whether that
meant unusual in the United
States or unusual in the world.
So, some people think that's
quite relevant. Other people
think it isn't so relevant.
I put that in, in the opinion to
show that we are virtually
alone, but some other countries
have it. Nonetheless, that
wasn't my main basis for the
conclusion. The conclusion was,
we should hear the question of
whether the death penalty is
unconstitutional. And there
were other reasons.
Arbitrariness, wrong person,
long delays, the diminished
number of cases
in the United States, just a
handful, where death is actually
carried out, those were
the basic reasons I thought we
should reconsider the question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A number of your
-- well, four of your more
conservative colleagues on the
court have made it very clear
they're troubled by the idea of
being influenced by foreign
law.
In a number of cases over the
years, this has come up. It's
come up in Congress when
members of -- nominees to the
Supreme Court have been seeking
confirmation. Do you think
that kind of implacable
opposition to paying attention
to foreign law is softening
among
some of your colleagues?
STEPHEN BREYER: Yes, for this
reason, in this respect, and
that's one reason I wrote this
book.
If you look at the cases
actually before us, they're much
different and often far more
mundane, but perhaps very
important, than death penalty
cases. They involve, for
example,
treaties, which deal with what?
Which deal with marriages that
failed and abduction of
children across boundaries.
Why do we have those treaties?
Because, today, marriage is more
and more international. And
who interprets treaties? We do.
The federal courts do. And when
we interpret them, do
we pay attention to what other
countries have said is the right
meaning of the treaty?
Absolutely.
And you can find in all of -- I
think that's a unanimous view.
So, there are many issues
where of course you have to take
into account foreign matters.
And that's what I want to
show has become more and
more of our business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you're saying
-- and one of the reasons you
wrote the book was to influence
your fellow justices.
STEPHEN BREYER: No, I'm just
saying I want the ordinary --
the ordinary reader -- and
I prefer, you know, people read
this -- contrary to popular
belief, of our 315 million
citizens,
314 million are not lawyers.
(LAUGHTER)
STEPHEN BREYER: And I would like
them to have a chance, too, to
know what goes on in the
court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A broader
question about the court,
Justice Breyer.
Critics on the right, some of
them are now saying this court
has become too activist.
Among other things, they're
pointing to the ruling in
support of same-sex marriage.
They're
saying, why should the Supreme
Court be intervening itself in
an area where the public is
still
sorting itself out?
How do you answer
that? Is the court...
STEPHEN BREYER: Everyone -- and
everyone has a right to
criticize the court. And, oddly
enough, what we do, the nine
members, rarely try to respond
to the criticism.
Why? Because our job, our job,
which we take very, very
seriously, our job is to look at
the individual case in front of
us, to read perhaps a dozen,
perhaps 100 briefs that have
been filed on the two sides, to
try to understand, through the
argument, written and oral, and
discussion in the court, where
the right answer lies and try to
write as best we can our real
reasons for reaching the
conclusions that we reached.
Now, we take that job seriously.
David Souter said, we are never
off-duty. And we're not.
And that is what we must
continue to do. And, ultimately,
I believe -- and others --
Justice
Brandeis believed this -- that
the best hope for maintaining
the respect for the court
that is necessary for our
Constitution to work is just do
your job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Justice Stephen
Breyer, the book is "The Court
and the World: American
Law and the New
Global Realities."
We thank you very much for
coming to sit down and talk to
us. Thank you.
STEPHEN BREYER: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what's killing some of
California's oldest and largest
trees;
one man's mission to protect
Congo's gorillas amid decades of
war; and a fashion photographer
on what clothes do and don't say
about the people wearing them.
But, first, another take on our
legal system, this time, a
conversation with the writer
who is among the newest class of
MacArthur fellows, and today was
named a finalist for
a National Book Award for his
writing about race, crime and
punishment.
The book is "Between the World
and Me," and his latest
contribution to "The Atlantic"
magazine examines the black
family in the age of mass
incarceration.
Ta-Nehisi Coates joins me now.
Welcome.
TA-NEHISI COATES, "The
Atlantic": Thanks for having me,
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: It's a very, very
long magazine article, probably
one of the longest, if not
the longest, that "Atlantic"
has ever published.
TA-NEHISI COATES: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: And in it and in
your book and in a magazine
article you wrote last year
about reparations, it seems to
reveal an ongoing sense of deep
pessimism, not only about
America,
but especially about
African-Americans.
TA-NEHISI COATES: Well, I
wouldn't call it pessimistic.
I would call it, if I can use
the word, realpolitik is
probably a word that I would
actually use.
I think there's a way of looking
at African-American life and
looking at the long struggle
against
racism in this country that is
current within our politics, and
then there's a whole different
way that people talk about when
I go talk to academics, when I
go talk to sociologists,
and when I talk to historians.
And that world, I guess, some
would feel is pessimistic. I
don't think it's pessimistic,
because I think any struggle
worth having takes place across
generations. And so one
of the things that, if that work
does anything, it forgoes the
possibility of great and
tremendous
change within our lifetime.
But, you know, it's not so
pessimistic about the long term,
I don't think.
GWEN IFILL: But when you talk
about the gray wastes...
TA-NEHISI COATES: Right.
GWEN IFILL: ... that is not an
optimistic term. Explain what it
is, first of all.
TA-NEHISI COATES:
Well, it's prison.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
TA-NEHISI COATES: I mean, the
gray wastes is a description of
our sprawling jail and
prison system.
I was looking for some sort of
terminology that, as far as I
could see accurately reflected,
not just in terms of hard
numbers, but compelled people to
feel what it was. And the gray
wastes
is what I settle on.
When you write about mass
incarceration, when you write
about housing discrimination, as
I was writing about in the case
of reparations, when you write
about death at the hands of
the police, as I was in "Between
the World and Me," the language
does not tend to happy
fun time. It tends to be hard.
GWEN IFILL: Which is why I'm
surprised you don't see it as
pessimistic.
But let's get back to that.
TA-NEHISI COATES: OK.
GWEN IFILL: Because you frame
this particular article with --
you use Daniel Patrick Moynihan,
the senator from New York, to
frame this. He, in 1965, wrote a
very famous report on
the state of the Negro family,
as it was called then.
TA-NEHISI COATES: Right, right.
GWEN IFILL: He played a role not
only in writing that, but also
on the other end, in creating
some of the problems you
say continue to exist.
TA-NEHISI COATES: Right, right.
Well, in 1965, Daniel Patrick
Moynihan does this report on the
black family. Daniel Patrick
Moynihan is very, very
sympathetic to the black family,
very, very sympathetic to black
people in general and to the
problem of race in this country.
He was arguing -- you know,
effectively, he used the family
as the lens to look at the
community, assembled all these
social economic indicators to
show where black families were
as compared to the rest, and
hoped that what would follow was
benevolent investment.
The argument that I make in the
piece is that, in fact, what
followed was malevolent
investment,
that a lot of problems that
Daniel Patrick Moynihan was
dealing with in that report,
we basically outsourced to our
prison system, instead of our
normal social service system.
And the piece is all about why
we did that. And, regrettably,
some of that is within -- some
of the reason why we did that
can be seen within the history
of Daniel Moynihan himself.
GWEN IFILL: You make a
connection between the tangle of
pathology that he famously wrote
about...
TA-NEHISI COATES: Right.
GWEN IFILL: ... and the tangle
of perils that African-American
men mostly face now.
TA-NEHISI COATES:
Right, right, right.
And I wanted to be clear about
the difference. You know, the
pathology summons these notions
of a diseased patient, of
somebody that is afflicted. And,
for me, whenever I'm writing
about racism, again, through all
three of these pieces, I think
people shouldn't lose
sight of the fact that
it's a done thing.
And the tangles of peril, I felt
better conveyed the notion that
somebody had done certain
things, that we had made certain
decisions about housing in this
country, that we had
made certain decisions about how
we were going to punish certain
crimes in this country,
that we make decisions about any
number of things in terms of how
we're going to invest
our resources as a country.
And that has effects.
GWEN IFILL: You make a case, a
connection between the efforts
we took to fix crime,
whether it was three strikes
you're out, or whether it was
just the war on drugs, and
you made that connection to that
and mass incarceration as we see
it now.
TA-NEHISI COATES: Yes.
What we had, and certainly you
can't get away from the fact
that we did have a crime rise
in this country beginning in the
early '70s and proceeding into
the '80s and into and
beginning to level off as you
get into the '90s, until it
started to plunge, really,
really plunge in the late
'90s and into the 2000s.
And, oftentimes, that's the
argument we get for how we ended
up with so many people in
jail. The problem, of course, is
that the crime rise and the
subsequent fall that happened
at the middle to the end of the
20th century actually is an
international phenomena.
Same thing happened in Canada.
Same thing happened in Great
Britain. Same thing happened
across much of Europe. America
is unique in mass incarceration,
nevertheless. Everybody
didn't choose that as the answer
for how they were going to deal
with policy.
We made that decision. And my
argument is that you can't
divorce that from the history
of looking at black people as
though they have some sort of
predilection towards
criminality.
GWEN IFILL: Now, this won't be
the first time you have been
asked this question. What about
personal responsibility? What
about the fact that numbers seem
to show that African-Americans
commit more crimes?
TA-NEHISI COATES:
African-Americans do commit more
crimes. There's just no -- no
one can
really make a -- have a -- as a
percentage of the population of
the country. There's
no way to get away from that.
GWEN IFILL: So, why is that the
nation's responsibility to fix
it, if the community won't fix
it itself?
TA-NEHISI COATES: Because the
conversation doesn't end there.
The conversation then has to
become, why is that? Can it be
said that African-American
communities are the same as all
other communities? Can it be
said that African-American
communities
have the same amount of
resources as all other
communities? Can it be said that
African-American
-- that other communities, like
African-American communities,
have the same history of people
extracting resources out
of their community?
If you look at the policy, what
the policies have been towards
the African-American community
historically in this country,
that there's more crime in
African-American communities
doesn't, you know,
come as a surprise.
African-Americans in general
tend to live in more
criminogenic conditions than
other
communities. And so the fact
that, you know, crime actually
occurs, you know, more likely
in those communities shouldn't
come as a particular surprise to
anyone.
GWEN IFILL: What
are the solutions?
TA-NEHISI COATES: Well, I think
the first thing to do, as I have
argued in my case for
reparations, is reparations.
And I know that doesn't quite
sound like a solution to
everybody because it can't be
done right now. But I believe
it's a long-term solution,
because the basic problem, the
basic
problem in this country with
black people and with white
people is that you have a huge
discrepancy in wealth.
And the easiest way, though not
the only way, I can demonstrate
that is the huge wealth
gap. For every dollar of wealth
that a white family has,
African-American families have
a nickel. That is not a mistake.
That is not the result of magic.
That is the result of done
policy. That is the result of,
you know, a long history of
enslavement in this country,
followed by Jim Crow, which was
the extraction of resources,
followed by erecting loan
policies for home loans in this
country that African-Americans
were not given access to,
followed by a safety net policy
that black people did not have
the same access to.
It just does not make sense that
you would have that, and then
not do nothing, and then
expect that everything is going
to go away, that everything is
going to be all right.
GWEN IFILL: Ta-Nehisi Coates,
congratulations on your honors
that you have gotten recently.
TA-NEHISI COATES:
Thank you. Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: And thank
you for talking to us.
TA-NEHISI COATES:
Thank you, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: On tomorrow's
program, we continue our look at
mass incarceration, this time
from the prisoner's perspective.
The "NewsHour"'s William
Brangham was granted rare access
to
a maximum security jail in
Maryland where a unique pilot
program is trying to put a
stop to the revolving
prison door.
MAN: This idea that solely,
solely taking someone's freedom
away changes behavior, in
many cases, it changes it for
the worse. And that's not what
America's correctional
facilities
were founded on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: California's
historic drought has created a
long list of problems for the
Golden State, including killing
millions of trees in the Sierra
Nevada Mountain Range.
Now even the iconic giant
sequoias, which can live
thousands of years, are starting
to show signs that they're
not getting enough water.
Our colleagues at public TV
station KQED in San Francisco
joined a team of biologists
from the University of
California, Berkeley, as they
climbed 50 of these giant trees
this
summer in Sequoia National Park.
The story was produced by
Gabriela Quiros and narrated by
Scott Shafer.
SCOTT SHAFER: Anthony Ambrose is
climbing this giant sequoia to
find out how it's faring
after four years of drought.
ANTHONY AMBROSE, University of
California, Berkeley: We are at
about 240 feet at the
top of a giant sequoia tree.
SCOTT SHAFER: These leaves will
tell him how stressed out the
tree is due to the lack of
water.
ANTHONY AMBROSE: You need to
measure them kind of at the most
relaxed time of the day,
before the sun rises, before
they start to lose water to the
atmosphere. They require
an enormous amount of water, way
more than any other tree that
has ever been documented.
SCOTT SHAFER: His colleague
Wendy Baxter is near the top of
another giant sequoia.
WENDY BAXTER, University of
California, Berkeley: Giant
sequoias are just such special
trees.
They have been able to persist
and live in this exact place
maybe for thousands of years.
Some of them live to
be 3,000 years old.
SCOTT SHAFER: Over the course of
their long lives, sequoias can
grow as tall as a 30-story
building.
WENDY BAXTER: Well, there's
a beautiful view up here.
SCOTT SHAFER: Even at these
great heights, leaves contain
water.
WENDY BAXTER: There is higher
concentrations of water in the
soil than in the air. So,
that gradient is actually
pulling the water up through the
tree.
SCOTT SHAFER: Inside each of the
trees' cells, water gets pulled
up to the top as if it were
being sucked up through a straw.
Researchers can determine how
much tension the water is
under as it travels upward
and into each leaf.
WENDY BAXTER: When we clip it,
the water retracts back into the
stem, kind of like a rubber
band.
SCOTT SHAFER: Researcher Ken
Schwab places the leaves in a
pressure chamber.
WENDY BAXTER: When we put our
stem into the pressure chamber,
the amount of pressure that
it takes to force the water back
out is an indication of how much
tension it was under.
MAN: And I'm beginning to
see darkening and water.
SCOTT SHAFER: The higher the
pressure required to push the
water out, the more stressed the
tree is.
MAN: The trees are definitely as
stressed as we have ever
measured giant sequoia. We
have been measuring giant
sequoia water status
periodically over the last few
decades, under
non-drought conditions, and most
of the trees seem to be kind of
at that level or exceeding
it.
SCOTT SHAFER: Trees move water
from soil to the atmosphere,
which helps create rain and
snow. When little water is
available, the pull of the dry
atmosphere breaks the water
column. Air in the water forms
bubbles, which prevent water
from moving up. If bubbles stop
water flow in cell after
cell, the tree dies.
Biologist Nathan Stephenson says
sequoias' main water source is
snow.
NATHAN STEPHENSON, U.S.
Geological Survey: So the last
two winters here have been by
far the warmest on record, and
what that's meant is there's
been almost no snow on the
ground.
SCOTT SHAFER: The weak snowpack
has led to new signs that the
giant trees are under stress.
NATHAN STEPHENSON: I looked up,
and I saw a big, mature, giant
sequoia, and its foliage
was turning brown. At least half
of its foliage had gone brown.
No one has ever reported that
before.
SCOTT SHAFER: While only a
handful of the park's sequoias
have recently perished, the
Forest Service says the drought
is taking a toll on more than
six million trees of other
species in the Sierra
Nevada Mountain Range.
NATHAN STEPHENSON: We're seeing
firs, pines, incense cedars and
oaks are all dying at a
rate we have never seen before.
Even during the 1977 drought in
California, we didn't
see this many trees dying.
SCOTT SHAFER: In Sequoia
National Park, Koren Nydick says
the giant trees are causing
concerns.
KOREN NYDICK, Sequoia National
Park: A lot of our sequoias are
still appearing healthy,
still doing well during the
drought. But there are some that
are showing symptoms, and we
want to learn more about that
and be able to track that
stress.
SCOTT SHAFER: To help
researchers study the effects of
the drought on the tens of
thousands
of giant sequoias in the Sierra
Nevada, scientists aboard the
Carnegie Airborne Observatory
use
instruments to measure trees'
water content. Blue trees are
getting the most water, followed
by yellow, orange, and red
trees, which are getting the
least.
The park has several options for
helping the most vulnerable
giant sequoias. Burning part
of the forest would reduce the
number of overall trees, and
since sequoias are resistant to
fire, more would survive.
KOREN NYDICK: There's less
competition for the larger trees
that remain behind. So the
larger trees have more access to
water and nutrients, and helps
them get through the
drought.
SCOTT SHAFER: If the trees'
health continued to deteriorate,
Nathan Stephenson of the
Geological
Survey says humans may need to
intervene more directly and
provide trees with drip
irrigation.
NATHAN STEPHENSON: If humans
continue to warm the climate by
adding greenhouse gases to
it, we might have to consider
some unnatural actions.
SCOTT SHAFER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Scott Shafer.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight, we conclude
our series Congo's Hope with the
story of park ranger
Emmanuel de Merode.
"PBS NewsHour" contributing
editor Soledad O'Brien visited
the Congo's Virunga National
Park, where she learned just how
dangerous and at times fatal it
can be to protect the
park's gorillas.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Emmanuel de
Merode is an anthropologist, a
Belgian prince, and chief
warden of the Virunga National
Park in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, one of the most
fought-over national
parks on the planet.
Once a draw for tourists, the
park's animals and resources
have been depleted by poachers
and a civil war. The park's
story was chronicled in the
Oscar-nominated film "Virunga."
De
Merode commands a force of 680
rangers. He's lost 140
protecting the park and survived
an attempt on his own life.
We spoke to him about the fight
to preserve the park and its
rare and special creatures.
You're an anthropologist by
training. What made you want to
dedicate your life to the
mountain gorillas?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE, Director,
Virunga National Park: I'm very
attached to this country, to
Congo. I came here 23 years ago
as a volunteer, as a researcher.
It was the simple fact that
Congo some of the richest
wildlife, some of the most
spectacular
natural landscapes in the world.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: How
big is the park?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: It stretches
on for 300 kilometers north.
It's a very big park. What's
special about it is, it's
incredibly diverse, so there's
probably no park on Earth that
has such an incredible range of
landscapes that go from the
summit of the Rwenzori
Mountains,
which is right up in the north
of the park, and that goes up to
17,000 feet.
So you have glaciers on the
equator. And then all the way
down to about 3,000 feet, and,
in between, just the most
incredible range of utterly
different landscapes. And
because
of that, you have got this
incredible range of species.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What
kind of species?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: So, we have
got the mountain gorillas that
we have here, lowland gorillas
and chimpanzees, but also all
the Savannah species that are so
classically African, the
elephants, the hippos, this
incredible assemblage.
There's no park probably in the
world that has so many species
of mammals, reptiles,
and birds as Virunga. That's
what makes it so special.
There's nowhere else in the
world
that I would like to live. And
so it has everything for me.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Where are we
right now? This is the walls of
the orphanage.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: So this is
the Senkwekwe Center. And so
it's a sanctuary that we built
a few years ago with the help of
Howard Buffett. It was built to
provide a home for the mountain
gorillas that were rescued after
these terrible massacres that
happened in 2007.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: And these
orphans, will they live in here
forever or do they go out into
the bigger habitat
at some point?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: You know,
the ideal thing would be to
reintroduce them into their
natural
habitat so that they can live a
complete life as wild gorillas.
But that may not be possible
for all sorts of reasons. They
may find it impossible to adapt
back into the natural
world.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What
can gorillas teach us?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Well,
there's an enormous amount, and
it's not just the science.
They're the window, in a sense,
to relaunching a healthy economy
in this region thanks to
the tourism industry that's
developing. But, in themselves,
they're absolutely wonderful
animals. There's nothing quite
like mountain gorillas, because
they're so powerful. They're
incredibly gentle by nature.
Their whole ecology and their
whole social structure is very
family based. And they take
on the very gentle side of
primate life in a sense. And so,
because of that, we were
able to spend a lot of time with
them, because they welcome human
beings into their groups.
And over the years, we have
developed a very rich
literature, a very rich
scientific knowledge
on gorilla ecology, gorilla
social systems that actually
teach us a lot about ourselves.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: How close is
a gorilla to a human being?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: In terms of
their genetics, they're about 98
percent the same as we are.
And so it's just an accident of
evolution that we are here and
that they are here. They,
of course, tend to take the more
positive aspects of our
condition. And we tend to
sometimes
be more destructive.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Is the story of
Virunga essentially a battle
over resources and -- and who
owns
them and who -- who steals them?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: It's exactly
that. There've been four
catastrophic wars over the last
20 years.
Every single one of those wars
has started either in or
immediately around the national
park. Those wars collectively
have -- have caused the death of
over six million people,
so it's a very, very serious
issue, and it's all about access
to resources.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What would you
like people to know? I mean,
there will be a bunch of
people who have followed the
conflict over the years and who
will be watching this.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What would
you -- what's your message?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Well, what
we'd like is really to
demonstrate that it's not just
about
a humanitarian crisis. There
actually is an incredibly
dynamic young population in
Congo
that really wants to work, and
that really want to take hold of
-- you know, get control
of their future by
rebuilding the industry.
What that means for people
outside is that Congo is
actually a very, very
interesting
place to invest in.
Here, you can really get the
full picture of how it all
works.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Wow.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: This will
generate electricity for about
100 years. That's the lifespan
of
this plant. It generates 13
megawatts, which is basically
three times what the whole city
of Goma is getting
at the moment.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: So, the whole
point of creating power is to
drive industry locally.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: We saw a woman
putting bananas onto her truck,
or the boys carrying the
sugarcane.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What happens?
What's the process now?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Well, that's
really the tragedy of Congo, is
that it's incredibly
rich in resources, but
they're all being exported.
All the money is lost in
transport, and none of it is
retained for the people of
Congo,
and so really that's what we
need to turn around. To be able
to do it, the key is
electricity.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Could you
create an industry once you have
power that would process the
sugarcane, or process the
bananas that these women are
hauling?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: So, when we
built our first hydroelectric
plant, it was a very small
one, a few hundred kilometers
north from here. Before we'd
even finished the plant, some
investors came and built a soap
factory, and that soap factory
now employs 400 people.
It also has increased the income
for 10,000 farmers, producing
palm oil, and it's reduced
the price of soap for about five
million Congolese consumers.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: So a win for
the people, a win for the
workers.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE:
Yes. It's been...
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: All out of
one hydroelectric plant.
You have had to put your own
life on the line as well.
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: Yes, at
times, I think we all have,
those of us who work here.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Can you talk
about, as much as you would want
to, the incident where you
were shot?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: There are
waves, there are periods of
violence, and one of those
was last year.
And I was driving back towards
the park. I happened to be alone
in the vehicle. So, with
hindsight, that was probably a
mistake. As I was driving
through a forested park up the
road, I saw in the distance a
man with a rifle. As I got
closer, he raised his rifle and
he
opened fire on the vehicle.
I realized I had to get away
from that situation as quickly
as I can. So I took the rifle
that
I had with me in the car and got
out of the vehicle. And that
point, I got hit in the
chest and through the stomach. I
was able to breathe and to get
into the forest. And
then what I remember is a very
wonderful thing. There were two
farmers who came, and they
had seen what happened. And they
came with a motorbike, and they
picked me up.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Did it ever
make you think, maybe I should
stop?
EMMANUEL DE MERODE: No, I think
that's really a decision you
make when you start. You know,
I have lost many of my staff;
140 of our rangers have died
since the war started, and 23
have
died on my watch.
They have died on the orders
that I gave. And so it would
never occur to me to stop.
GWEN IFILL: Soledad will answer
your questions about her
reporting from the Democratic
Republic
of Congo Friday at 1:00 p.m.
Eastern in our weekly "NewsHour"
Twitter chat. Send your
thoughts and your questions
using #Congoshope or
#NewsHourChats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
an eye for fashion in the
everyday.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
JEFFREY BROWN: A casually
stylish woman on a SoHo, New
York, street, and Scott Schuman
was there to grab the shot. It
was one of many photographs he
would take this day, examples
of street style that Schuman
captures around the world, not
fashion trends or brands
exactly,
but something more
individual and personal.
SCOTT SCHUMAN, Photographer: I
bet if you stand right on the
edge a little bit, turn
rights towards me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Something Schuman
saw, for example, in this
blue-haired young man.
SCOTT SCHUMAN: I think this was
the thing that first caught my
eye was this. Color is
one thing, but there was
actually a lot of nice little
texture in the shirt, the hair,
and, you know, there
was something sweet.
At the end of the day, there was
just something sweet about him.
There was something that
you thought you could capture. I
mean, look, the quality of the
expression on his face.
JEFFREY BROWN: Later, a
photograph of the young man
showed up on The Sartorialist,
the
blog Schuman launched 10 years
ago. It's become a go-to,
must-see site for millions
around
the world, both in and out
of the fashion industry.
Schumann, now 47, didn't pick up
a camera in a serious way until
he was a 31-year-old
stay-at-home dad taking photos
of his kids at the park. He'd
worked in the fashion industry
for many years. It was an
interest that started early, as
a teenager in the suburbs of
Indianapolis.
SCOTT SCHUMAN: There was an
Armani ad of a guy in a suit,
and I thought, my dad doesn't
look like that in a suit. When
my dad puts on a suit on, he
looks very stiff and very
serious and this and that. I
mean, this guy looks totally
relaxed, and he looks like he
could just go jump on the back
of a motorcycle in a his suit.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Armani
ad did it for you, huh?
SCOTT SCHUMAN: It totally did.
It totally opened my eyes in a
way that I just thought
I didn't know people lived this
way. And so in that same kind of
romantic way that I fell
in love with fashion when I was
15 is still the way that I like
to shoot.
JEFFREY BROWN: The clothes
telling you something about who
they might be, and clothes as
sort
of an identity?
SCOTT SCHUMAN: Kind of, you
know, like a costume. I think,
the more I do it, the more I
realize
that, to, me it's also more like
a costume, like how a director
would have costumes in
a movie, and how the clothes
kind of -- because I never
assume that that's who they
really
are, right, or that they can
really tell you anything about
that person.
But it helps you imagine who
they might be or -- I don't
consider myself a
photojournalist.
Mine are really just my kind of
take on who that person is, and
how the clothes kind of
help create the image.
JEFFREY BROWN: But the photos
are just a starting point for
the real action, Schuman says,
which
is found in the give-and-take
from his audience around the
world.
SCOTT SCHUMAN: When I started, I
was listening to a lot of sports
talk radio.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes?
SCOTT SCHUMAN: And people, you
know, they talk about sports and
their kind of point
of view, People will call in and
they really have a discussion,
and somehow it clicked
in my mind that you could do
something similar like that in
fashion.
I could go out and take pictures
of people on the street, put it
on the blog, and then
people could have their
comments. You know, I love the
way that looks, or that looks
horrible,
or who is this person?
So, I never worry about if I'm
telling the story of who this
person really is. It's totally
my perception, how
they make me dream.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's your story.
SCOTT SCHUMAN: It's my
perception of this picture. It's
my picture. But then when you
share it on the Internet, then
everybody gets to have their
take on what their story is
on it.
JEFFREY BROWN: This was Fashion
Week in New York. And for part
of the day, Schuman joined
the scrum of photographers
snapping photos outside a
Lacoste show, and then had a
front-row
seat for the runway action.
Most days, though, he does this,
rides his bike around New York
and other cities looking
for subjects. Nice work if you
can make it work, which Schuman
does through ads on the
blog and through collaborations
with designers. He's a
self-described shy guy stopping
total
strangers on the street.
SCOTT SCHUMAN: Good, good, good,
good. You can put your hands in
your pocket.
I think that shyness makes me
very understanding of other
people. I can put myself in
their
position, the way that I have to
approach a straight guy, and
walk up to some straight
guy on the street and say, hey,
you look great, can I take your
picture?
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
SCOTT SCHUMAN: And make him feel
that I'm not trying to hit on
him. And same thing,
like if I walk up to a girl who
looks really cool and say, oh,
you look really great, can
I take your picture, I have to
make sure she understands I am
not trying to hit on her.
JEFFREY BROWN: These are the
challenges of your trade, eh?
SCOTT SCHUMAN: Totally the
challenges, and totally -- it
comes from being sensitive to
myself, to try and put
myself in their position.
JEFFREY BROWN: The blog led to
books. A new one coming this
fall is titled "The
Sartorialist:
X," featuring street style
around the world, Italian men
smoking outside a trattoria, a
mother at an outdoor market in
Peru, a young man on a moped in
Bali, and much more.
Is there such a thing as a
global style? Are you seeing a
global style or a diversity
around...
SCOTT SCHUMAN: Oh, it's a
total, total diversity.
A great example is, I was in
Soweto in South Africa, and
there was a young guy there, and
he had on a suit that he bought
at a secondhand store. When I
shot him -- and he's in the
third book -- pulled back far
enough that you get the context
of who he is, the way
he's dressed, and the
place where he lives.
And to me, that's what really
makes the photograph so
endearing, is that you have got
this kid
who felt -- talking to him, I
felt like I was talking to
myself. He was another
15-year-old
me. He had a dream of the
outside world, and was trying to
figure out how to fit into that
outside world while he
still lived in his place.
First of all, they're nice
portraits. Hopefully, they're
beautiful portraits. Hopefully,
it's
a nice portrait of a person.
JEFFREY BROWN: And on our walk
through SoHo, Schuman was ever
on the lookout for the next
bit of style to catch his eye.
From the streets of downtown
Manhattan, I'm Jeffrey Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Medicare's annual open
enrollment begins tomorrow, and
so we kick off a series with our
benefits expert, Phil Moeller,
who breaks down everything
you need to know to get started.
For the next few weeks, his Ask
Phil column will also answer
your questions.
You can read Phil's guide and
find out how to leave your
question on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie Rose": The
New York Times' Maggie Haberman
and Clinton adviser Roger Altman
analyze the Democratic
presidential debate and the
outlook
for the candidates.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
And we're glad to have you back.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.